STLC Phases Explained with Examples

1. Requirement Analysis
Goal: Understand and analyze testing requirements from the software requirements document (SRS, BRD).

QA Tasks:

Participate in requirement review meetings.

Identify testable and non-testable requirements.

Detect gaps or ambiguities and clarify with stakeholders.

Example:
A login system is to be developed. The requirement says:

"Users should log in using username and password and receive a token."

QA’s Role:

Ask: What is the password policy? Token expiry?

Clarify: What happens on 3 failed attempts? Is 2FA involved?

2. Test Planning
Goal: Define the scope, objectives, resources, effort estimation, schedule, and deliverables.

QA Tasks:

Choose testing approach (manual, automation, API testing).

Identify tools (e.g., Pytest for APIs, Selenium for UI).

Prepare Test Strategy/Plan document.

Estimate effort and assign roles.

Example:
For a banking app:

Plan to test login, transaction, and balance check modules.

API tests will be written using Pytest.

Test data will be masked for privacy.

3. Test Case Design / Test Development
Goal: Create detailed test cases that cover all requirements.

QA Tasks:

Write test cases (positive, negative, edge).

Prepare test data.

Get test cases reviewed and signed off.

Example: For the login API:

TC001: Valid login -> Expect 200 OK
TC002: Invalid password -> Expect 401 Unauthorized
TC003: Empty fields -> Expect 400 Bad Request
Pytest Example:

def test_login_valid():
    response = requests.post("api/login", json={"user": "abc", "pass": "123"})
    assert response.status_code == 200
4. Test Environment Setup
Goal: Prepare hardware and software conditions to execute test cases.

QA Tasks:

Coordinate with DevOps/IT to set up environments.

Configure tools (Postman, Pytest, Selenium Grid, etc.).

Deploy latest build in QA/test environment.

Example:

Set up test DB with sample users.

Backend API deployed on staging server.

Authentication keys and test URLs configured.

5. Test Execution
Goal: Execute the test cases and record actual vs expected results.

QA Tasks:

Run manual or automated test cases.

Log test results.

Raise defects for failures in Jira/Bugzilla.

Re-test and regression test after bug fixes.

Example:
Running API tests for /transfer-funds and logging failure due to timeout:

bash
Copy
Edit
pytest -v test_funds.py > results.log
6. Defect Reporting & Tracking
Goal: Identify, log, and track bugs to closure.

QA Tasks:

Report detailed bug with steps to reproduce, severity, logs/screenshots.

Communicate with dev team.

Verify the bug fix in the next build.

Example Bug Report:


Title: Login fails with valid creds
Steps:
1. POST to /login with user/pass
2. Server returns 500
Severity: High
Logs: Attached traceback
7. Test Cycle Closure
Goal: Analyze and summarize testing efforts. Evaluate quality of product and testing coverage.

QA Tasks:

Prepare test summary report.

Finalize and archive test artifacts (test cases, logs, results).

Metrics: pass/fail rate, defect leakage, test coverage.

Retrospective meeting to improve future cycles.

Example:

100 test cases executed, 90 passed, 10 failed and fixed.

Bug leakage reduced from last cycle by 30%.

Lessons: Automate critical path early, improve test data management.


Unit Testing 

Unit Testing is a type of software testing where individual units or components of the software are tested in isolation to ensure that each part functions as intended.


Integration Testing 

Integration Testing verifies that multiple components or systems work together correctly.


